node-report: meld into core (#22712)
nodejs/node: doc/api/node_report.md

# node-report

Delivers a human-readable diagnostic summary, written to file
or retrieved as a text.

The report is intended for development, test and production
use, to capture and preserve information for problem determination.
It includes JavaScript and native stack traces, heap statistics,
platform information and resource usage etc. With the report enabled,
reports can be triggered on unhandled exceptions, fatal errors, signals.

Many capabilities are available as APIs too, for being consumed in-process.

> Iin-built node-report function is supported in Node.js versions 11.0.0 onwards.

Reviewer: nit: `s/Iin-built/The built-in`

> For Node.js versions 8 and below, please use it's [npm counterpart][] instead.

Reviewer 2: typo is fixed.

## Usage

```bash
node --report-events fatalerror,signal,exception app.js
```

> A report will be triggered automatically on unhandled exceptions and fatal

Reviewer 2: Done.

error events (for example out of memory errors), and can also be triggered

> by sending a USR2 signal to a Node.js process (not supported on Windows).

Reviewer: I would just say `sending a SIGUSR2 signal...`

A report can also be triggered via an API call from a JavaScript
application.

```js
const util = require('util');
util.triggerReport();
```
The content of a report can also be returned as a JavaScript string via an
API call from a JavaScript application.

```js
const util = require('util');

> const report_str = util.getReport();

Reviewer 3: I would prefer this to go into `@nodejs/report` instead as there is some consensus in that direction.
Otherwise, I would go for `util.report.generate()` or something similar.

Reviewer: Another possibility would be `util.generateDiagnosticReport()`. I'm not convinced that a new standalone module (even scoped) is necessary for this.

Reviewer 3: My overall concern is that this adds 3 different methods to `util`. Moreover, the docs for this is separate. Even if we do not want a separate method, just having a `util.report` namespace would be more user friendly.

(I would also avoid to load this until `util.report`  is accessed).

Reviewer: I'd be good with `util.report` with the methods:

* `util.report.getDiagnosticReport([error])`
* `util.report.generateDiagnosticReport([filename][, error])`
* `util.report.setDiagnosticReportOptions(options)`

Reviewer 4: @jasnell Can we use some abstractions (classes?) instead of going with `aMethodWith20Letters`?

console.log(report_str);
```

These APIs can be used without adding the automatic exception
and fatal error hooks and the signal handler.

Content of the report consists of a header section containing the event
type, date, time, PID and Node version, sections containing JavaScript and
native stack traces, a section containing V8 heap information, a section
containing libuv handle information and an OS platform information section
showing CPU and memory usage and system limits. An example report can be
triggered using the Node.js REPL:

```raw
$ node
> const util = require('util');
> util.triggerReport();
Writing Node.js report to file: node-report.20180820.091102.8480.001.txt
Node.js report completed
>
```

When a report is triggered, start and end messages are issued to stderr
and the filename of the report is returned to the caller. The default filename
includes the date, time, PID and a sequence number. Alternatively, a filename

> can be specified as a parameter on the `triggerReport()` call.

Reviewer: Does this filename conform to typical `require('fs')` path rules? For instance, could I pass in a file URL here? `triggerReport(new URL('file:///whatever')`. If there are differences between this and what `fs` accepts, or if there are no differences, it should be noted here.

Reviewer 2: The file name will be treated as file name in the local fs and no translation occurs on the passed string. Documentation is updated. quoting the same.

```+ filename specifies the name of the output file in the file system```
```+ No translations occur to the supplied string, so URL protocols```
```+ are not supported.```

```js
require('util').triggerReport('myReportName');
```

Both `triggerReport()` and `getReport()` can take an optional `Error` object
as a parameter. If an `Error` object is provided, the message and stack trace
from the object will be included in the report in the `JavaScript Exception
Details` section.
When using node-report to handle errors in a callback or an exception handler
this allows the report to include the location of the original error as well
as where it was handled.
If both a filename and `Error` object are passed to `triggerReport()` the

> `Error` object should be the second parameter.

Reviewer: s/should/must

```js
try {
  process.chdir('/foo/foo');
} catch (err) {
  util.triggerReport(err);
}
// ...
```

## Configuration

Additional configuration is available using the following APIs:

```js
const util = require('util');
util.setEvents('exception+fatalerror+signal');
util.setSignal('SIGUSR2|SIGQUIT');
util.setFileName('stdout|stderr|<filename>');
util.setDirectory('<full path>');

> util.setVerbose('yes|no');

Reviewer: I'd prefer a single API call for this... something like:

```js
// Changes all of the options
util.setDiagnosticReportOptions({
  events: ['exception', 'fatalerror', 'signal'],
  signal: 'SIGUSR2',
  filename: 'stderr',
  directory: '<full path>',
  verbose: true
});

// Only changes verbose, leaves other settings as they are
util.setDiagnosticReportOptions({
  verbose: false
});
```

Reviewer 2: Done.

Author: we just have a single API now for configuring the report options, with every option made optional, aiming to improve the user experience when dealing with such an API (relatively long name, long list of options)

```

Configuration on module initialization is also available via
environment variables:

```bash
export NODEREPORT_EVENTS=exception+fatalerror+signal+apicall
export NODEREPORT_SIGNAL=SIGUSR2|SIGQUIT
export NODEREPORT_FILENAME=stdout|stderr|<filename>
export NODEREPORT_DIRECTORY=<full path>

> export NODEREPORT_VERBOSE=yes|no

Reviewer: Definitely agree with this.

> export NODEREPORT_VERBOSE=yes|no

Reviewer 5: +1

> export NODEREPORT_VERBOSE=yes|no

Author: thanks all, makes sense. I am around this point of implementing this. Can we have a consensus on the semantics please?

Right now, the NODE_OPTIONS carry command line arguments that is a true replica of what we pass to the node command, space separated.

So what we have is 5 tunables:
 - event triggers
 - signal types
 - report file name
 - report dump location
 - verbosity

against a single flag (--node-report or --report-events or whatever we are converging into)

How do we present those? the high level flag followed by a space, and everything else as '=' separated key value pairs with each pairs separated by commas?

I don't see any precents that I can baseline. I am open to suggestions.

> export NODEREPORT_VERBOSE=yes|no

Reviewer 6: @gireeshpunathil Is there a reason not to use more flags, if that makes things easier? We do that for e.g. trace events, too

> export NODEREPORT_VERBOSE=yes|no

Reviewer 6: Yup, something like that – Maybe some of the flags that pick triggers could be grouped into a comma-separated pack?

> export NODEREPORT_VERBOSE=yes|no

Reviewer 7: > Yup, something like that – Maybe some of the flags that pick triggers could be grouped into a comma-separated pack?

That was the idea behind `--report-events` in https://github.com/nodejs/node/pull/19661 as the option to specify triggers (e.g. `--report-events signal,exception`). I think James commented that `--report-events` was misleading, so maybe `--report-trigger` or `--report-when` (I'd avoid `--report-on` as it implies `--report-off`). I would imagine to start with node-report would be opt-in, so to enable it you would have to specify at least one trigger (hence no need for a separate `--report-enabled` flag).

I think all command line options for node-report should have a common prefix (e.g. `--report-`) in a similar way that the trace events options are prefixed `--trace-event-` (although that has the exception of `--trace-events-enabled`).

> export NODEREPORT_VERBOSE=yes|no

Reviewer 2: This is now implemented as NODE_OPTIONS . Quoting the same from documentation.

```+ NODE_OPTIONS="--experimental-report --report-catch-exception  ```
```+ --report-catch-fatalerror --report-catch-signal --report-signal=SIGUSR2 ``` 
```+ --report-filename=./report.json --report-directory=/home/nodeuser --report-verbose=true"```

# node-report

> Delivers a json-formatted Diagnostic summary, written to a file.

Reviewer 2: Done.

The report is intended for development, test and production use, to capture
and preserve information for problem determination. It includes JavaScript
and native stack traces, heap statistics, platform information, resource
usage etc. With the report option enabled, diagnostic reports can be triggered
on unhandled exceptions, fatal errors and user signals, in addition to
triggering programatically through API calls.

The built-in report is supported in Node.js versions from REPLACEME onwards.
For Node.js versions REPLACEME and below, use its [npm counterpart][] instead.

## Usage

```bash
node --experimental-report --report-catch-exception
 --report-catch-signal --report-catch-fatalerror app.js
```

* `--experimental-report` Enables the diagnostic report feature.

>  In the absence of this flag, all other report related options will be ignored.

Reviewer 6: This might be surprising and take a bit to figure out, since it’s failing silently, unlike unknown options… I’d personally prefer to make the other flags imply `--experimental-report`, since they all represent a form of explicit opt-in, but I could see reluctancy from other collaborators…

Reviewer 5: I'm not sure that --experimental-report makes sense to me because it then requires people to change the command line option when we promote to non-experimental.  I'd agree that just having the other three flags would be the right way to go, and to have them documented as experimental.

Author: If all other flags imply `--experimental-report`, it becomes redundant?

From an end-user's point of view, isn't it more consumable if we make it more explicit? For example:
 - `--experimental-report` only enables the feature, and exports the APIs
 - `--experimental-report` graduates to `--report` upon exiting experimental
 - `based on adoption and user feedback, `--report` may graduate to default in which case the flag disappears

does this proposition sounds reasonable to you all?

Reviewer 6: @gireeshpunathil All I’m saying is that it’s not good for options to be ignored if the user expects them not to be ignored. I’d rather have us error out than fail silently.

> `--experimental-report` graduates to `--report` upon exiting experimental

What would that flag do then?

> based on adoption and user feedback, `--report` may graduate to default in which case the flag disappears

I think that’s a bit ambitious… Node.js doesn’t really generate any files on its own right now, and changing that is a pretty big modification to our UX.

Author: this is addressed now; `--experimental-report` acts like a lock to open up the feature, while other special flags enables report generation on respective events. Switching on special flags without the generic flag results in an error, so that usage is disambiguated.

Reviewer 2: changes done to documentation as well.

 
* `--report-catch-exception` Enables report to be generated on un-caught
exceptions. Useful when inspecting JavaScript stack in conjunction with native
stack and other Runtime environment data.  

* `--report-catch-signal` Enables report to be generated upon receiving
the specified (or predefined) signal to the running Node process. (See below
on how to modify the signal that triggers the report). Default signal is `SIGUSR2`.
Useful when report needs to be generated at arbitrary control flow points.
Application monitors may leverage this feature to collect report at regular
intervals and plot rich set of internal runtime data to their views.

Signal based report generation is not supported in Windows.

Under normal circumstances, there is no need to modify the report triggering
signal. However, if Node is embedded in native applications that have

> pre-existing definition to `SIGUSR2` this flag helps to change that without

Reviewer 6: Maybe s/definition/listener/?

Reviewer 2: done, thanks.

affecting the behavior of the embedder.

* `--report-catch-fatalerror` Enables the node-report to be triggered on
fatalerror (internal errors within the Node.js runtime such as out of memory)
that leads to termination of the application. Useful to inspect various
diagnostic data elements such as heap, stack, event loop state, resource
consumption etc. to reason about the fatalerror.

A report can also be triggered via an API call from a JavaScript application:

```js

> const report = require('util').report;

Reviewer 2: Modified as suggested.

report.triggerReport();
```

The API takes an optional additional argument `filename` which is the name
of a file into which the report is written.

```js
const { report } = require('util');
report.triggerReport('./foo.json');
```

> The API take an optional additional argument `err` - an Error object that will

Reviewer 5: take -> takes

Reviewer 2: done, thanks

> be used as the context fo the JavaScript stack printed in the report. When

Reviewer 2: done, thanks.

using report to handle errors in a callback or an exception handler this
allows the report to include the location of the original error as well
as where it was handled.

```js
try {
  process.chdir('/non-existent-path');
} catch (err) {
  report.triggerReport(err);
}
// any other code
```

If both filename and error object are passed to `triggerReport()` the
error object must be the second parameter.

```js
try {
  process.chdir('/non-existent-path');
} catch (err) {
  report.triggerReport(filename, err);
}
// any other code
```

The content of the diagnostic report can be returned as a JavaScript string
via an API call from a JavaScript application:

```js
const { report } = require('util');
const str = report.getReport();
console.log(str);
```

> The API take an optional additional argument `err` - an Error object that will

Reviewer 5: take -> takes

Reviewer 2: done, thanks.

> be used as the context fo the JavaScript stack printed in the report.

Reviewer 2: done, thanks.

```js
const { report } = require('util');
const str = report.getReport(new Error('custom error'));
console.log(str);
```

The API versions are useful when inspecting the Runtime state from within
the application, in expectation of self-adjusting the resource consumption,
load balancing, monitoring etc.

Content of the report consists of a header section containing the event

> type, date, time, PID and Node version, sections containing JavaScript and

Reviewer 2: done, thanks.

native stack traces, a section containing V8 heap information, a section
containing `libuv` handle information and an OS platform information section
showing CPU and memory usage and system limits. An example report can be
triggered using the Node.js REPL:

```raw
$ node
> const { report } = require('util');
> report.triggerReport();
Writing Node.js report to file: node-report.20181005.091102.8480.001.json
Node.js report completed
>
```

When a report is triggered, start and end messages are issued to stderr
and the filename of the report is returned to the caller. The default filename
includes the date, time, PID and a sequence number. The sequence number helps
in associating the report dump with the runtime state if generated multiple

> times against the same Node process.

Reviewer 2: done, thanks.

## Configuration

Additional runtime configuration that influences the report generation
constraints are available using `setDiagnosticReportOptions` API.

```js
const { report } = require('util');
report.setDiagnosticReportOptions({
  events: ['exception', 'fatalerror', 'signal'],
  signal: 'SIGUSR2',
  filename: 'stderr',
  directory: '/home/nodeuser',
  verbose: true
});
```

`events` array contain one or more of report triggering options.
Only valid values are `exception`, `fatalerror` and `signal`.
By default, a report is not produced on any of these events.

`signal` specifies the POSIX signal identifier that will be used
to intercept external triggers for report generation. Defaults to
`SIGUSR2`.

`filename` specifies the name of the output file in the file system.
No translations occur to the supplied string, so URL protocols
are not supported. Defaults to a composite filename that contain

> timestamp, pid and sequence number.

Reviewer 2: Explanation added. Thanks.

# node-report

Delivers a JSON-formatted Diagnostic summary, written to a file.

The report is intended for development, test and production use, to capture
and preserve information for problem determination. It includes JavaScript
and native stack traces, heap statistics, platform information, resource
usage etc. With the report option enabled, diagnostic reports can be triggered
on unhandled exceptions, fatal errors and user signals, in addition to
triggering programatically through API calls.

The built-in report is supported in Node.js versions from REPLACEME onwards.
For Node.js versions REPLACEME and below, use its [npm counterpart][] instead.

## Usage

```bash
node --experimental-report --report-uncaught-exception

>  --report-on-signal --report-on-fatalerror app.js

Reviewer 6: I’d use 2 spaces for indentation, like we always do, and end the first line with a backslash (so that you could actually copy and run this command)

```

* `--experimental-report` Enables the diagnostic report feature.
 In the absence of this flag, use of all other related options will result in 
 an error.
 
* `--report-uncaught-exception` Enables report to be generated on un-caught
exceptions. Useful when inspecting JavaScript stack in conjunction with native

> stack and other Runtime environment data.  

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
stack and other runtime environment data.
```

(There’s trailing whitespace in a lot of other places, too, if you look at the diff in the git command line viewer)

* `--report-on-signal` Enables report to be generated upon receiving
the specified (or predefined) signal to the running Node process. (See below
on how to modify the signal that triggers the report). Default signal is `SIGUSR2`.

> Useful when report needs to be generated at arbitrary control flow points.

Reviewer 6: … which is something that I think was supported when this PR was first opeened, but was changed because it was buggy by design iirc? How about this?

```suggestion
Useful when a report needs to be triggered from another program.
```

Application monitors may leverage this feature to collect report at regular
intervals and plot rich set of internal runtime data to their views.

Signal based report generation is not supported in Windows.

Under normal circumstances, there is no need to modify the report triggering

> signal. However, if Node is embedded in native applications that have

Reviewer 6: How does this relate to embedding/what is a “native application” in this context?

I think “If `SIGUSR2` is already used [by an application] for other purposes, …” might be sufficient?

Author: My thought was on the lines of: only an embedder can define special meaning to `SIGUSR2` as node does not. But I got you; an JS program also can built custom logic around this signal. So modified the wording as per your suggestion.

pre-existing listener to `SIGUSR2` this flag helps to change that without
affecting the behavior of the embedder.

* `--report-on-fatalerror` Enables the node-report to be triggered on

> fatalerror (internal errors within the Node.js runtime such as out of memory)

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
fatal errors (internal errors within the Node.js runtime, such as out of memory)
```

(and ditto about `leads` below in that case)

that leads to termination of the application. Useful to inspect various
diagnostic data elements such as heap, stack, event loop state, resource

> consumption etc. to reason about the fatalerror.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
consumption etc. to reason about the fatal error.
```

* `--report-directory` Location at which the report will be generated.

* `--report-filename` Name of the file to which the report will be written.

* `--report-signal` Sets or resets the signal for report generation (not
supported on windows). Default signal is `SIGUSR2`.

* `--report-verbose` Flag that controls additional verbose information on report
generation.

A report can also be triggered via an API call from a JavaScript application:

```js
const { report } = require('util');
report.triggerReport();
```

> The API takes an optional additional argument `filename` which is the name

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
This function takes an optional additional argument `filename`, which is the name
```

(Or “method”. I don’t believe “API” is common JS usage for individual functions.)

of a file into which the report is written.

```js
const { report } = require('util');
report.triggerReport('./foo.json');
```

> The API takes an optional additional argument `err` - an Error object that will

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
This function takes an optional additional argument `err` – an Error object that will
```

be used as the context for the JavaScript stack printed in the report. When

> using report to handle errors in a callback or an exception handler this

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
using report to handle errors in a callback or an exception handler, this
```

allows the report to include the location of the original error as well
as where it was handled.

```js
try {
  process.chdir('/non-existent-path');
} catch (err) {
  report.triggerReport(err);
}
// any other code
```

If both filename and error object are passed to `triggerReport()` the
error object must be the second parameter.

```js
try {
  process.chdir('/non-existent-path');
} catch (err) {
  report.triggerReport(filename, err);
}
// any other code
```

> The content of the diagnostic report can be returned as a JSON-formatted Object

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
The content of the diagnostic report can be returned as a JSON-formatted object
```

via an API call from a JavaScript application:

```js
const { report } = require('util');
const str = report.getReport();
console.log(str);
```

> The API takes an optional additional argument `err` - an Error object that will

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
This function takes an optional additional argument `err` – an Error object that will
```

be used as the context for the JavaScript stack printed in the report.

```js
const { report } = require('util');
const str = report.getReport(new Error('custom error'));
console.log(str);
```

> The API versions are useful when inspecting the Runtime state from within

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
The API versions are useful when inspecting the runtime’s state from within
```

the application, in expectation of self-adjusting the resource consumption,
load balancing, monitoring etc.

> Content of the report consists of a header section containing the event

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
The content of the report consists of a header section containing the event
```

type, date, time, PID and Node.js version, sections containing JavaScript and
native stack traces, a section containing V8 heap information, a section
containing `libuv` handle information and an OS platform information section
showing CPU and memory usage and system limits. An example report can be
triggered using the Node.js REPL:

```raw
$ node
> const { report } = require('util');
> report.triggerReport();
Writing Node.js report to file: node-report.20181126.091102.8480.001.json
Node.js report completed
>
```

When a report is triggered, start and end messages are issued to stderr
and the filename of the report is returned to the caller. The default filename
includes the date, time, PID and a sequence number. The sequence number helps
in associating the report dump with the runtime state if generated multiple

> times against the same Node.js process.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
times for the same Node.js process.
```

## Configuration

Additional runtime configuration that influences the report generation
constraints are available using `setDiagnosticReportOptions` API.

```js
const { report } = require('util');
report.setDiagnosticReportOptions({
  events: ['exception', 'fatalerror', 'signal'],
  signal: 'SIGUSR2',
  filename: 'stderr',
  directory: '/home/nodeuser',
  verbose: true
});
```

> `events` array contain one or more of report triggering options.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
The `events` array contains one or more of the report triggering options.
```

> Only valid values are `exception`, `fatalerror` and `signal`.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
The only valid entries are `exception`, `fatalerror` and `signal`.
```

By default, a report is not produced on any of these events.

`signal` specifies the POSIX signal identifier that will be used
to intercept external triggers for report generation. Defaults to
`SIGUSR2`.

`filename` specifies the name of the output file in the file system.

> special meaning is attached to `stdout` and `stderr`. Usage of these

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Special meaning is attached to `stdout` and `stderr`. Usage of these
```

will result in report being written to the associated standard streams.
No translations occur to the supplied string, so URL protocols are not

> supported. Defaults to a composite filename that contain timestamp, pid and

Reviewer 6: I’d remove the `No translations …` sentence.
Also:

```suggestion
supported. Defaults to a composite filename that contains the timestamp, pid and
```

Author: The background to the `No translations occur..` statement is is response to @jasnell 's proposal (https://github.com/nodejs/node/pull/22712#discussion_r215334799) to cover that case specifically. Do you think it is confusing, or not required at all?

Reviewer 6: I think “URLs are not supported” would be sufficient here, because it’s not generally clear what a translation is in this context?

Author: made this change.

sequence number.

> `path` specifies the filesystem path where the report will be written to.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
`path` specifies the filesystem directory path where the report will be written to.
```

(And ditto about removing `No translations …`)

Reviewer 6: Side note: I don’t really understand why we’re dealing with directories in the first place. Don’t the filename options already cover everything we’d need to specify a specific directory?

Author: I guess the original use case had 2 types of requirements:
 - over-ride the default filename convention of `TIMESTAMP.PID.SEQNO` (useful for monitor scripts that specifically want a filename)
 - over-ride the default path convention of `cwd` (useful for monitors that look at files in a specific location)

and these 2 requirements can be disjoint.

If this looks meaningful to you, then the only thing left is to document that the filename is a basename and relative; which I have added in the doc.

No translations occur to the supplied path name, so URL protocols
are not supported. Defaults to the current working directory of the
node process.

`verbose` specifies whether to print additional verbose messages

> pertinent to the report generation. Defaults to false.

Reviewer 6: This flag seems to be targeted at core developers – should we un-document it?

Author: unless there is a strong reason to hide it from public, my desire is it keep it as is.

```js
const { report } = require('util');

// trigger report only on uncaught exceptions
report.setDiagnosticReportOptions({ events: ['exception'] });

// trigger report for both internal errors as well as external signal
report.setDiagnosticReportOptions({ events: ['fatalerror', 'signal'] });

// change the default signal to `SIGQUIT` and enable it.
report.setDiagnosticReportOptions({ events: ['signal'], signal: 'SIGQUIT' });
```

Configuration on module initialization is also available via
environment variables:

```bash
NODE_OPTIONS="--experimental-report --report-uncaught-exception
--report-on-fatalerror --report-on-signal --report-signal=SIGUSR2

> --report-filename=./report.json --report-directory=/home/nodeuser --report-verbose=true"

Reviewer 6: ditto about indentation / using `\` for line endings
